General Prohibitions Part 736-page 1 Export Administration Regulations Bureau of Industry and Security November 17, 2023
Table of Contents
§ 736.1 INTRODUCTION .......................... 1
§ 736.2 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS AND
DETERMINATION OF APPLICABILITY 1
SUPPLEMENT NO. 1 TO PART 736 -
GENERAL ORDERS .................................. 1
SUPPLEMENT NO. 2 TO PART 736 -
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS .................. 1
§ 736.1 INTRODUCTION
In this part, references to the EAR are references
to 15 CFR chapter VII, subchapter C. A person
may undertake transactions subject to the EAR
without a license or other authorization, unless the
regulations affirmatively state such a requirement.
As such, if an export, reexport, or activity is
subject to the EAR, the general prohibitions
contained in this part and the License Exceptions
specified in part 740 of the EAR must be reviewed
to determine if a license is necessary. In the case
of all exports from the United States, you must
document your export as described in part 762 of
the EAR regarding recordkeeping and clear your
export through the U.S. Customs Service as
described in part 758 of the EAR regarding export
clearance requirements. Also note that for short
supply controls all prohibitions and License
Exceptions are in part 754 of the EAR.
(a) In this part we tell you:
(1) The facts that make your proposed export,
reexport, or conduct subject to these general
prohibitions, and
(2) The ten general prohibitions.
(b) Your obligations under the ten general
prohibitions and under the EAR depend in large
part upon the five types of information described
in §736.2(a) of this part and upon the general
prohibitions described in §736.2(b) of this part.
The ten general prohibitions contain cross-
references to other parts of the EAR that further
define the breadth of the general prohibitions.
For that reason, this part is not freestanding. In
part 732, we provide certain steps you may follow
in proper order to help you understand the general
prohibitions and their relationship to other parts of
the EAR.
(c) If you violate any of these ten general
prohibitions, or engage in other conduct contrary
to the Export Administration Act, the EAR, or any
order, license, License Exception, or
authorization issued thereunder, as described in
part 764 of the EAR regarding enforcement, you
will be subject to the sanctions described in that
part.
§ 736.2 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS AND
DETERMINATION OF APPLICABILITY
(a) Information or facts that determine the
applicability of the general prohibitions.
The following five types of facts determine your
obligations under the ten general prohibitions and
the EAR generally (also see other parts of the
EAR where the license requirements and other
EAR restrictions are specified in greater detail):
(1) Classification of the item. The classification
of the item on the Commerce Control List (see
part 774 of the EAR) or description of the item in
supplements no. 2, 4, or 6 to part 746 of the EAR.
For guidance on classifying items, see the
Commerce Control List Order of Review in
supplement no. 4 to part 774 and for determining
licensing requirements using the Commerce
Control List in supplement no. 1 to part 774 and
the Commerce Country Chart in supplement no. 1
to part 738, see § 738.4;
Note 1 to paragraph (a)(1): The description of
items in supplements no. 2, 4, or 6 of part 746 are
used for determining license requirements for
Russia and Belarus under §§ 746.5 and 746.10.
Items described in supplements no. 2, 4, or 6 in
most cases are designated as EAR99 (subject to
General Prohibitions Part 736-page 2
Export Administration Regulations Bureau of Industry and Security November 17, 2023
the EAR but not specifically listed on the
Commerce Control List).
(2) Destination. The country of ultimate
destination for an export, reexport, or transfer (in-
country) (see parts 738 and 774 of the EAR
concerning the Country Chart and the Commerce
Control List for export and reexport license
requirements and part 746 for additional license
requirements based on embargoes and other
special controls for exports, reexports, or certain
transfers (in-country));
(3) End user or end use. The ultimate end user
(see General Prohibition Four (paragraph (b)(4) of
this section) and supplement no. 1 to part 764 of
the EAR for references to persons with whom
your transaction may not be permitted; see
General Prohibition Five (Paragraph (b)(5) of this
section) and part 744 for references to end users
for whom you may need an export, reexport, or
transfer (in-country) license). Certain EAR
requirements (e.g., §§ 734.9(e), 744.11(a)), and
744.15(b)) extend to all parties to the transaction
as described in § 748.5(c) through (f). Many of
the end-use controls in part 744 specify
destinations or Country Groups as part of the
criteria for defining the scope of the end use
controls.
(4) End-use. The ultimate end-use (see General
Prohibition Five (paragraph (b)(5) of this section)
and part 744 of the EAR for general end-use
restrictions); and
(5) Conduct. Conduct such as contracting,
financing, and freight forwarding in support of a
proliferation project or a ‘military-intelligence
end use’ or a ‘military-intelligence end user,’ as
described in part 744 of the EAR.
(b) General prohibitions
The following ten general prohibitions describe
certain exports, reexports, transfers (in-country),
1 See part 738 of the EAR for selected controls that
and other conduct, subject to the scope of the
EAR, in which you may not engage unless you
either have a license from the Bureau of Industry
and Security (BIS) or qualify under part 740 of the
EAR for a License Exception from each
applicable general prohibition in this paragraph.
The License Exceptions at part 740 of the EAR
apply only to General Prohibitions One (Exports
and Reexports in the Form Received), Two (Parts
and Components Reexports), and Three (Foreign-
Produced “Direct Product” Reexports); however,
selected License Exceptions are specifically
referenced and authorized in part 746 of the EAR
concerning embargo destinations and in §
744.2(c) of the EAR regarding nuclear end-uses
and in § 744.11 and in supplement no. 4 to part
744 – Entity List.
(1) General Prohibition One — Export and
reexport of controlled items to listed countries
(Exports and Reexports). You may not,
without a license or License Exception, export
any item subject to the EAR to another country or
reexport any item of U.S.-origin if each of the
following is true:
(i) The item is controlled for a reason indicated
in the applicable Export Control Classification
Number (ECCN), and
(ii) Export to the country of destination
requires a license for the control reason as
indicated on the Country Chart at part 738 of the
EAR. (The scope of this prohibition is
determined by the correct classification of your
item and the ultimate destination as that
combination is reflected on the Country Chart).1
Note that each License Exception described at
part 740 of the EAR supersedes General
Prohibition One if all terms and conditions of a
given License Exception are met by the exporter
or reexporter.
(2) General Prohibition Two - Reexport and
export from abroad of foreign-made items
are not specified on the Country Chart.
General Prohibitions Part 736-page 3
Export Administration Regulations Bureau of Industry and Security November 17, 2023
incorporating more than a de minimis amount
of controlled U.S. content (U.S. Content
Reexports).
(i) You may not, without a license or license
exception, reexport or export from abroad
foreign-made commodities that incorporate
controlled U.S.-origin commodities, foreign-
made commodities that are ‘bundled’ with
controlled U.S.-origin software, foreign-made
software that is commingled with controlled U.S.-
origin software, or foreign-made technology that
is commingled with controlled U.S.-origin
technology if such items require a license
according to any of the provisions in the EAR and
incorporate or are commingled with more than a
de minimis amount of controlled U.S. content, as
defined in § 734.4 of the EAR concerning the
scope of the EAR.
(A) It incorporates more than the de minimis
amount of controlled U.S. content, as defined in
§734.4 of the EAR concerning the scope of the
EAR;
(B) It is controlled for a reason indicated in
the applicable ECCN; and
(C) Its export to the country of destination
requires a license for that control reason as
indicated on the Country Chart. (The scope of this
prohibition is determined by the correct
classification of your foreign-made item and the
ultimate destination, as that combination is
reflected on the Country Chart.)
(ii) Each License Exception described in part
740 of the EAR supersedes General Prohibition
Two if all terms and conditions of a given License
Exception are met by the exporter or reexporter.
(3) General Prohibition Three - Foreign-direct
product (FDP) rules.
(i) You may not, without a license or license
exception, export from abroad, reexport, or
transfer (in-country) foreign-“direct products”
subject to the EAR pursuant to § 734.9 if such
items are subject to a license requirement in part
736, 742, 744, 746, or 764 of the EAR.
(ii) Each license exception described in part 740
of the EAR supersedes General Prohibition Three
if all terms and conditions of a given license
exception are met and none of the restrictions of
§§ 740.2 or 744.11(a) apply.
(4) General Prohibition Four (Denial Orders) -
Engaging in actions prohibited by a denial
order.
(i) You may not take any action that is
prohibited by a denial order issued under part 766
of the EAR, Administrative Enforcement
Proceedings. These orders prohibit many actions
in addition to direct exports by the person denied
export privileges, including some transfers within
a single country, either in the United States or
abroad, by other persons. You are responsible for
ensuring that any of your transactions in which a
person who is denied export privileges is involved
do not violate the terms of the order. Orders
denying export privileges are published in the
Federal Register when they are issued and are the
legally controlling documents in accordance with
their terms. BIS also maintains compilations of
persons denied export privileges on its Web site at
http://www.bis.doc.gov. BIS may, on an
exceptional basis, authorize activity otherwise
prohibited by a denial order. See Sec.
764.3(a)(2) of the EAR.
(ii) There are no License Exceptions described
in part 740 of the EAR that authorize conduct
prohibited by this General Prohibition Four.
(5) General Prohibition Five – Export,
reexport, or transfer (in-country) to prohibited
end-uses or end-users (End-Use End-User).
You may not, without a license, knowingly
export, reexport, or transfer (in-country) any item
subject to the EAR to an end user or end use that
is prohibited by part 744 of the EAR. Each
section in part 744 specifies whether the license
requirements extend to exports, reexports, and
transfers (in-country).
General Prohibitions Part 736-page 4
Export Administration Regulations Bureau of Industry and Security November 17, 2023
(6) General Prohibition Six – Export,
reexport, and transfer (in-country) to
embargoed destinations (Embargo).
(i) You may not, without a license or license
exception or portion thereof that is specifically
listed in the license exceptions paragraph
pertaining to a particular sanctioned country or
region in part 746 of the EAR, export, reexport, or
transfer (in-country) any item subject to the EAR
to a country or region (e.g., the Crimea region of
Ukraine and covered regions of Ukraine) that is
embargoed by the United States or otherwise
made subject to controls under part 734 as both
are described at part 746 of the EAR. Each
section in part 746 specifies whether the license
requirements extend to exports, reexports, and
transfers (in-country).
(ii) License exceptions to General
Prohibition Six are described in part 746 of the
EAR, on Embargoes and Other Special Controls.
Unless a license exception or other authorization
is authorized in part 746 of the EAR, the license
exceptions described in part 740 of the EAR are
not available to overcome this general prohibition.
(7) General Prohibition Seven – Support of
proliferation activities and certain military-
intelligence end uses and end users (“U.S.
person” activities)-
(i) Support of proliferation activities and
certain military-intelligence end uses and end
users (“U.S. person” activities).
(A) If you are a “U.S. person,” as that term is
defined in § 772.1 of the EAR, you may not
engage in any activities prohibited by §§ 744.6(b)
or (c) of the EAR, which prohibit, without a
license from BIS, the shipment, transmission, or
transfer (in-country) of items not subject to the
EAR; facilitating such shipment, transmission, or
transfer (in-country); or the performance of any
contract, service, or employment (including, but
not limited to: ordering, buying, removing,
concealing, storing, using, selling, loaning,
disposing, servicing, financing, or transporting,
freight forwarding, or conducting negotiations in
furtherance of) that you know or are informed by
BIS will support:
(1) The design, “development,”
“production,” operation, installation (including
on-site installation), maintenance (checking),
repair, overhaul, or refurbishing of nuclear
explosive devices in or by any country not listed
in supplement no. 3 to part 744 of the EAR;
(2) The design, “development,”
“production,” operation, installation (including
on-site installation), maintenance (checking),
repair, overhaul, or refurbishing of “missiles” in
or by a country listed in Country Groups D:4 or
E:2;
(3) The design, “development,”
“production,” operation, installation (including
on-site installation), maintenance (checking),
repair, overhaul, or refurbishing of chemical or
biological weapons in or by any country or
destination worldwide;
(4) The design, “development,”
“production,” operation, installation (including
on-site installation), maintenance (checking),
repair, overhaul, refurbishing, shipment, or
transfer (in-country) of a whole plant to make
chemical weapons precursors identified in ECCN
1C350, in or by countries other than those listed
in Country Group A:3 (Australia Group); or
(5) A ‘military-intelligence end use’ or a
‘military-intelligence end user,’ as defined in
§ 744.22(f) of the EAR, in Belarus, Burma, the
People’s Republic of China, Russia, or
Venezuela; or a country listed in Country Groups
E:1 or E:2.
(B) If you are a “U.S. person” as that term
is defined in § 772.1 of the EAR, you may not
export a Schedule 1 chemical listed in
Supplement No. 1 to part 745 without first
complying with the provisions of §§ 742.18 and
General Prohibitions Part 736-page 5
Export Administration Regulations Bureau of Industry and Security November 17, 2023
745.1 of the EAR.
(C) If you are a “U.S. person” as that term
is defined in § 772.1 of the EAR, you may not
export a Schedule 3 chemical listed in
Supplement No. 1 to part 745 to a destination not
listed in Supplement No. 2 to part 745 without
complying with the End-Use Certificate
requirements in § 745.2 of the EAR that apply to
Schedule 3 chemicals controlled for CW reasons
in ECCN 1C350, ECCN 1C355, and ECCN
1C395.
(ii) [Reserved]
(8) General Prohibition Eight - In transit
shipments and items to be unladen from vessels
or aircraft (Intransit).
(i) Unlading and shipping in transit. You
may not export or reexport an item through, or
transit through a country listed in paragraph
(b)(8)(ii) of this section, unless a license
exception or license authorizes such an export or
reexport directly to or transit through such a
country of transit, or unless such an export or
reexport is eligible to such a country of transit
without a license.
(ii) Country scope. This General Prohibition
Eight applies to Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus,
Cambodia, Cuba, Georgia, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Mongolia, North Korea,
Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine,
Uzbekistan, Vietnam.
(9) General Prohibition Nine - Violation of any
order, terms, and conditions (Orders, Terms,
and Conditions). You may not violate terms or
conditions of a license or of a License Exception
issued under or made a part of the EAR, and you
may not violate any order issued under or made a
part of the EAR. There are no License
Exceptions to this General Prohibition Nine in
part 740 of the EAR. Supplements Nos.
1 and 2 to this part provide for certain General
Orders and Administrative Orders.
(10) General Prohibition Ten - Proceeding with
transactions with knowledge that a violation
has occurred or is about to occur (Knowledge
Violation to Occur). You may not sell, transfer,
export, reexport, finance, order, buy, remove,
conceal, store, use, loan, dispose of, transport,
forward, or otherwise service, in whole or in part,
any item subject to the EAR and exported,
reexported, or transferred (in-country) or to be
exported, reexported, or transferred (in-country)
with knowledge that a violation of the Export
Administration Regulations, the Export Control
Reform Act of 2018, or any order, license, license
exception, or other authorization issued
thereunder has occurred, is about to occur, or is
intended to occur in connection with the item. Nor
may you rely upon any license or license
exception after notice to you of the suspension or
revocation of that license or exception. There are
no license exceptions to this General Prohibition
Ten in part 740 of the EAR.
General Orders Supplement No. 1 to Part 736–page 1
Export Administration Regulations Bureau of Industry and Security November 17, 2023
SUPPLEMENT NO. 1 TO PART 736 - GENERAL ORDERS
(a) General Order No. 1
General Order No. 1 of September 16, 1998;
Establishing a 24-month validity period on
reexport authorizations issued without a validity
period and revoking those exceeding that period.
(1) Reexport authorizations issued within
24-months of the General Order. All reexport
authorizations issued with no validity period
within the 24-months preceding September 16,
1998 shall be deemed to have an expiration date
which shall be the date 24-months from the date
of issuance of the reexport authorization or
November 16, 1998, whichever is longer.
(2) Reexport authorizations issued before the
24-month period preceding the General Order.
For reexport authorizations issued with no
validity period before the 24-month period
preceding September 16, 1998:
(i) Effective September 16, 1998, all such
outstanding reexport authorizations for terrorist-
supporting countries (see parts 742 and 746 of the
EAR) are revoked.
(ii) Effective November 16, 1998, all other
such outstanding reexport authorizations are
revoked.
(3) Extensions. If necessary, you may request
extensions of such authorizations according to
procedures set forth in §750.7(g) of the EAR.
(4) Specific Notice from BIS. If you have
received, or should you receive, specific notice
from BIS with regard to a reexport authorization
covered by this General Order, informing you of
a revocation, suspension, or revision (including
validity period) of any such reexport
authorization, then the terms of that specific
notice will be controlling.
(5) Definition of “authorization.” The term
“authorization” as used in this General Order
encompasses the range of reexport authorizations
granted by BIS, which includes licenses,
individual letters, and other types of notifications.
(b) General Order No. 2
General Order No. 2; Section 5(b) of the Syria
Accountability and Lebanese Sovereignty
Restoration Act of 2003 (SAA) gives the
President authority to waive the application of
certain prohibitions set forth in the SAA if the
President determines that it is in the national
security interest of the United States to do so.
The President made such a determination in
Executive Order 13338, finding that it was “in the
national security interest of the United States to
waive application of subsection 5(a)(1) and
5(a)(2)(A) of the SAA so as to permit the
exportation or reexportation of certain items as
specified in the Department of Commerce’s
General Order No. 2.”
The President’s reference to General Order No. 2
addresses applications to export and reexport the
following items, which are considered on a case-
by-case basis as opposed to the general policy of
denial set forth in section 746.9 of the
Regulations: items in support of activities,
diplomatic or otherwise, of the United States
Government (to the extent that regulation of such
exportation or reexportation would not fall within
the President's constitutional authority to conduct
the nation's foreign affairs); medicine (on the
CCL) and medical devices (both as defined in Part
772 of the EAR); parts and components intended
to ensure the safety of civil aviation and the safe
operation of commercial passenger aircraft;
aircraft chartered by the Syrian Government for
the transport of Syrian Government officials on
official Syrian Government business;
telecommunications equipment and associated
computers, software and technology; items in
support of United Nations operations in Syria; and
General Orders Supplement No. 1 to Part 736–page 2
Export Administration Regulations Bureau of Industry and Security November 17, 2023
items necessary for the support of the Syrian
people, including, but not limited to, items related
to water supply and sanitation, agricultural
production and food processing, power
generation, oil and gas production, construction
and engineering, transportation, and educational
infrastructure. The total dollar value of each
approved license for aircraft parts for flight safety
normally will be limited to no more than $2
million over the 24-month standard license term,
except in the case of complete overhauls.
NOTE to GENERAL ORDER NO. 2. The
controls for exports and reexports to Syria are set
forth in § 746.9 of the EAR.
(c) General Order No. 3
General Order No. 3 of July 22, 2015. Certain
licenses issued by BIS prior to July 22, 2015
contain conditions that restrict the export,
reexport, or transfer (in-country) to or within
Country Group E:1 as specified in Supplement
No. 1 to part 740 of the EAR. At the time those
license were issued, Cuba was in Country Group
E:1. Many of those restrictions were intended to
apply to Cuba, not only as a State Sponsor of
Terrorism but also as a country subject to
unilateral embargo. However, BIS did not
always list both Country Groups E:1 and E:2 in
license conditions because, at the time, doing so
would have been redundant. However, with the
rescission of Cuba’s designation as a State
Sponsor of Terrorism and resultant removal from
Country Group E:1, continuing those conditions
with respect to Cuba is consistent with the
embargo. Accordingly, all conditions that apply
to Country Group E:1 on licenses issued prior to
July 22, 2015 that are in effect on that date, are
revised to apply to Country Groups E:1 and E:2 as
specified in Supplement No. 1 to part 740 of the
EAR. Licensees who seek authorization for
transactions that are affected by this General
Order No. 3 may submit license applications that
refer to General Order No. 3 and explain the
reason for the request in Block 24 of the
application. All license applications involving
Cuba are reviewed pursuant to the licensing
policy in § 746.2(b) of the EAR. The request
should provide any available information in
support of the argument that the transaction would
be consistent with the licensing policy in
§ 746.2(b) of the EAR.
(d) General Order No. 4
Exports, reexports, or transfers (in-country)
authorized under the Temporary General Licenses
(TGL) specified under paragraphs (d)(1) and (2)
of this supplement must also comply with the
terms and conditions under paragraphs (d)(3)
through (5) of this supplement.
(1) TGL - Less restricted SME “parts,”
“components,” or “equipment.” This TGL
only overcomes the license requirements
described in § 744.23(a)(4) of EAR when:
(i) Product scope. The items subject to the
EAR that are specified on the Commerce Control
List (CCL) in supplement no. 1 to part 774 that are
designated as controlled on the CCL only for AT
reasons; and
(ii) End-use scope. The recipient is
“developing” or “producing” “parts,”
“components,” or “equipment” (as specified in
§ 744.23(a)(4)) at the direction of a company that
is headquartered in the United States or a
destination specified in Country Group A:5 or A:6
and not majority-owned by an entity
headquartered in either Macau or a destination
specified in Country Group D:5.
(2) TGL – Advanced computing items. This
TGL only overcomes the license requirements
described in § 742.6(a)(6)(iii) of EAR when:
(i) Product scope. The items subject to the
EAR that are specified in ECCNs 3A001.z;
3A090; 3D001 (for “software” for commodities
controlled by 3A001.z, 3A090); 3E001 (for
General Orders Supplement No. 1 to Part 736–page 3
Export Administration Regulations Bureau of Industry and Security November 17, 2023
“technology” for commodities controlled by
3A001.z, 3A090); 4A003.z; 4A004.z; 4A005.z;
4A090; 4D001 (for “software” for commodities
controlled by 4A003.z, 4A004.z, and 4A005.z);
4D090; 4E001 (for “technology” for commodities
controlled by 4A003.z, 4A004.z, 4A005.z, 4A090
or “software” specified by 4D001 (for 4A003.z,
4A004.z, and 4A005.z), 4D090); 5A002.z;
5A004.z; 5A992.z; 5D002.z; 5D992.z; 5E002 (for
“technology” for commodities controlled by
5A002.z or 5A004.z or “software” specified by
5D002 (for 5A002.z or 5A004.z commodities));
or 5E992 (for “technology” for commodities
controlled by 5A992.z or “software” controlled by
5D992.z) of the Commerce Control List (CCL);
and
(ii) End-use scope. Any item identified
under the paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this supplement,
may be exported, reexported, or transferred (in-
country) to or within a destination specified in
Country Groups D:1, D:4, or D:5 (and not
specified in Country Groups A:5 or A6) when the
recipient is located in but is not headquartered or
whose ultimate parent company is not
headquartered in Macau or Country Group D:5
to continue or engage in integration, assembly
(mounting), inspection, testing, quality assurance,
and distribution of items covered by items
specified in paragraph (d)(2)(i) for the ultimate
end use of these items outside of destinations
specified in Country Groups D:1, D:4, or D:5 (and
not specified in Country Groups A:5 or A6) by
entities not headquartered or whose ultimate
parent company is not headquartered in Macau or
a destination specified in Country Group D:5.
(3) Validity date. The TGLs under paragraphs
(d)(1) and (2) of this supplement expire on
December 31, 2025.
(4) End-use and end-user restrictions.
(i) Restrictions related to part 744 of the
EAR. The TGL under paragraphs (d)(1) and (2)
of this supplement does not overcome the license
requirements of § 744.11 or § 744.21 of the EAR
when an entity listed in supplements no. 4 or 7 to
part 744 is a party to the transaction as described
in § 748.5(c) through (f) of the EAR, or when
there is knowledge of any other prohibited end use
or end user (other than the § 744.23 provisions
specified above in the TGL).
(ii) Indigenous production.
(A) The TGL under paragraph (d)(1) of
this supplement cannot be used for the indigenous
“development” or “production” of Category 3B
tools in either Macau or a destination specified in
Country Group D:5, i.e., where the “part,”
“component,” or “equipment” is “developed” or
“produced” at the direction of an entity that is
headquartered in, or whose ultimate parent
company is headquartered in, either Macau or a
destination specified in Country Group D:5.
(B) The TGL under paragraph (d)(2) of
this supplement cannot be used for the indigenous
“development” or “production” of any item
identified under paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this
supplement where the “part,” “component,” or
“equipment” is “developed” or “produced” at the
direction of an entity that is headquartered in, or
whose ultimate parent company is headquartered
in, either Macau or a destination specified in
Country Group D:5.
(5) Recordkeeping requirement. All exports,
reexports, transfer (in-country), and exports from
abroad shipped under the authorization of this
TGL are subject to the recordkeeping
requirements of part 762. The records subject to
this recordkeeping requirement include but are
not limited to directives to the parties that are
eligible to use this TGL and a list of the parties
that have received directives. Each party that
issues or acts upon a directive is responsible for
keeping a record of that directive.
(e) General Order No. 5
General Orders Supplement No. 1 to Part 736–page 4
Export Administration Regulations Bureau of Industry and Security November 17, 2023
General Order No. 5 of April 16, 2013;
Authorization for Items the President Determines
No Longer Warrant Control under the United
States Munitions List (USML).
(1) Continued use of DDTC approvals from the
Department of State’s Directorate of Defense
Trade Controls (DDTC) for items that become
subject to the EAR. Items the President has
determined no longer warrant control under the
USML will become subject to the EAR as
published final rules that transfer the items to the
CCL become effective. DDTC licenses,
agreements, or other approvals that contain items
transitioning from the USML to the CCL and that
are issued prior to the effective date of the final
rule transferring such items to the CCL may
continue to be used in accordance with the
Department of State’s final rule, Amendments to
the International Traffic in Arms Regulations:
Initial Implementation of Export Control Reform,
published on April 16, 2013 in the Federal
Register.
(2) BIS authorization.
(i) Where continued use of DDTC
authorization is not or is no longer an available
option, or a holder of an existing DDTC
authorization returns or terminates that
authorization, any required authorization to
export, reexport, or transfer (in-country) a
transitioned item on or after the effective date of
the applicable final rule must be obtained under
the EAR. Following the publication date and
prior to the effective date of a final rule moving
an item from the USML to the CCL, applicants
may submit license applications to BIS for
authorization to export, reexport, or transfer (in-
country) the transitioning item. BIS will process
the license applications in accordance with
§ 750.4 of the EAR, hold the license application
without action (HWA) if necessary, and issue a
license, if approved, to the applicant no sooner
than the effective date of the final rule
transitioning the items to the CCL.
(ii) Following the effective date of a final rule
moving items from the USML to the CCL,
exporters, reexporters, and transferors of such
items may return DDTC licenses in accordance
with § 123.22 of the ITAR or terminate Technical
Assistance Agreements, Manufacturing License
Agreements, or Warehouse and Distribution
Agreements in accordance with § 124.6 of the
ITAR and thereafter export, reexport, or transfer
(in-country) such items under applicable
provisions of the EAR, including any applicable
license requirements. No transfer (in-country)
may be made of an item exported under a DDTC
authorization containing provisos or other
limitations without a license issued by BIS unless
(i) the transfer (in-country) is authorized by an
EAR license exception and the terms and
conditions of the License Exception have been
satisfied, or (ii) no license would otherwise be
required under the EAR to export or reexport the
item to the new end user.
(3) Prior commodity jurisdiction
determinations. If the U.S. State Department has
previously determined that an item is not subject
to the jurisdiction of the ITAR and the item was
not listed in a then existing “018” series ECCN
(for purposes of the “600 series” ECCNs, or the
0x5zz ECCNs) or in a then existing ECCN
9A004.b or related software or technology ECCN
(for purposes of the 9x515 ECCNs), then the item
is per se not within the scope of a “600 series”
ECCN, a 0x5zz ECCN, or a 9x515 ECCN. If the
item was not listed elsewhere on the CCL at the
time of such determination (i.e., the item was
designated EAR99), the item shall remain
designated as EAR99 unless specifically
enumerated by BIS or DDTC in an amendment to
the CCL or to the USML, respectively.
(4) Voluntary Self-Disclosure. Parties to
transactions involving transitioning items are
cautioned to monitor closely their compliance
General Orders Supplement No. 1 to Part 736–page 5
Export Administration Regulations Bureau of Industry and Security November 17, 2023
with the EAR and the ITAR. Should a possible
or actual violation of the EAR, or of any license
or authorization issued thereunder, be discovered,
the person or persons involved are strongly
encouraged to submit a Voluntary Self-Disclosure
to the Office of Export Enforcement, in
accordance with § 764.5 of the EAR. Permission
from the Office of Exporter Services, in
accordance with § 764.5(f) of the EAR, to engage
in further activities in connection with that item
may also be necessary. Should a possible or
actual violation of the ITAR, or of any license or
authorization issued thereunder, be discovered,
the person or persons involved are strongly
encouraged to submit a Voluntary Disclosure to
DDTC, in accordance with § 127.12 of the ITAR.
For possible or actual violations of both the EAR
and ITAR, the person or persons involved are
strongly encouraged to submit disclosures to both
BIS and DDTC, indicating to each agency that
they also have made a disclosure to the other
agency.
Administrative Orders Supplement No. 2 to Part 736–page 1
Export Administration Regulations Bureau of Industry and Security November 17, 2023
SUPPLEMENT NO. 2 TO PART 736 - ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS
Administrative Order One: Disclosure of License
Issuance and Other Information. Consistent
with section 12(c) of the Export Administration
Act of 1979, as amended, information obtained
by the U.S. Department of Commerce for the
purpose of consideration of or concerning license
applications, as well as related information, will
not be publicly disclosed without the approval of
the Secretary of Commerce. Electronic Export
Information (EEI) filings via the Automated
Export System (AES) are also exempt from
public disclosure, except with the approval of the
Secretary of Commerce, in accordance with
§301(g) of Title 13, United States Code.
Administrative Order Two: Conduct of Business
and Practice in Connection with Export Control
Matters.
(a) Exclusion of persons guilty of unethical
conduct or not possessing required integrity
and ethical standards
(1) Who may be excluded. Any person,
whether acting on his own behalf or on behalf of
another, who shall be found guilty of engaging in
any unethical activity or who shall be
demonstrated not to possess the required integrity
and ethical standards, may be excluded from
(denied) export privileges on his own behalf, or
may be excluded from practice before BIS on
behalf of another, in connection with any export
control matter, or both, as provided in part 764 of
the EAR.
(2) Grounds for exclusion. Among the
grounds for exclusion are the following:
(i) Inducing or attempting to induce by gifts,
promises, bribes, or otherwise, any officer or
employee of BIS or any customs or post office
official, to take any action with respect to the
issuance of licenses or any other aspects of the
administration of the Export Administration Act,
whether or not in violation of any regulation;
(ii) Offering or making gifts or promises
thereof to any such officer or employee for any
other reason;
(iii) Soliciting by advertisement or otherwise
the handling of business before BIS on the
representation, express or implied, that such
person, through personal acquaintance or
otherwise, possesses special influence over any
officer or employee of BIS;
(iv) Charging, or proposing to charge, for any
service performed in connection with the
issuance of any license, any fee wholly
contingent upon the granting of such license and
the amount or value thereof. This provision will
not be construed to prohibit the charge of any fee
agreed to by the parties; provided that the out-of-
pocket expenditures and the reasonable value of
the services performed, whether or not the license
is issued and regardless of the amount thereof, are
fairly compensated; and
(v) Knowingly violating or participating in
the violation of, or an attempt to violate, any
regulation with respect to the export of
commodities or technical data, including the
making of or inducing another to make any false
representations to facilitate any export in
violation of the Export Administration Act or any
order or regulation issued thereunder.
(3) Definition. As used in this Administrative
Order, the terms “practice before BIS” and
“appear before BIS” include:
(i) The submission on behalf of another of
applications for export licenses or other
documents required to be filed with BIS, or the
execution of the same;
Administrative Orders Supplement No. 2 to Part 736–page 2
Export Administration Regulations Bureau of Industry and Security November 17, 2023
(ii) Conferences or other communications on
behalf of another with officers or employees of
BIS for the purpose of soliciting or expediting
approval by BIS of applications for export
licenses or other documents, or with respect to
quotas, allocations, requirements or other export
control actions, pertaining to matters within the
jurisdiction of BIS;
(iii) Participating on behalf of another in any
proceeding pending before BIS;
(iv) Submission on behalf of another of a
license or other export control document to U.S.
Customs and Border Protection (CBP); and
(v) Reporting on behalf of another Electronic
Export Information via the Automated Export
System (AES) to CBP.
(4) Proceedings. All proceedings under this
Administrative Order shall be conducted in the
same manner as provided in part 766 of the EAR.
(b) Employees and former employees
Persons who are or at any time have been
employed on a full-time or part-time,
compensated or uncompensated, basis by the
U.S. Government are subject to the provisions of
18 U.S.C. 203, 205, and 207 (Pub. L. 87–849,
87th Congress) in connection with representing a
private party or interest before the U.S.
Department of Commerce in connection with any
export control matter.